The population of villages in Hungary has been declining over the past few decades due to high rates of migration, natural loss, and urbanization. Population change indicators clearly demonstrate that the smallest villages are at the greatest risk of emigration. Rather than migrating to big cities, small villages in Hungary tend to migrate to larger villages. The decrease in the number of residents in small villages can lead to population aging, which, in turn, can exacerbate rural hollowing, deepening the inequality between small and large villages. To increase the population retention capacity of depopulated Hungarian villages, the Hungarian government has taken measures to encourage residents to stay in their villages. For example, the Hungarian Village Programme, which was launched in 2019, provides direct subsidies to municipalities of settlements with fewer than 5,000 inhabitants. The Housing subsidy for village families (CSOK) also began in 2019, aiming to provide support for those who want to construct or purchase a house. Additionally, the Secure Start Children’s Home program, which was launched in 2009, provides child protection allowances to children who live in settlements with populations of 1,000 to 4,000. The Long-term Programme of “Convergence Settlements” was also launched in 2019. However, although the Hungarian government’s measures are likely to allocate more money to mitigate the decline of the rural population, they leave less autonomy for implementation. Thus, more local and regional initiatives should be considered because greater local and regional autonomy can help make the system more reflective and flexible. Rural tourism is an industry that generates employment and income and provides a flexible system. Although Hungary lacks spectacular natural attractions, such as seaside, high mountains, or rainforests, the country boasts charming cultural landscapes, complete with small villages, thermal springs, rivers, and lakes. The traditional hospitality of the locals adds to the experience, creating an ideal environment for tourists seeking a tranquil setting to unwind and enjoy leisure activities. Through our research, we surveyed several rural tourism cases in Hungarian rural areas, and the findings revealed that rural tourism has immense potential to reduce inequality among different areas, mitigate the decline of the rural population, and contribute to economic growth. However, realizing these benefits would necessitate stronger collaboration among tourism suppliers, local government, and communities. Thus, it is recommended that greater emphasis should be placed on promoting local and regional initiatives to help address the challenges faced by small villages in Hungary.
